title: What Sleep Crime Tells Us About Consciousness
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=what-sleep-crime-tells-us-about-consciousness
author: James Vlahos
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Gerald Slota


In Brief

  *  Whether or not the brain is asleep or awake is
    not an either-or proposition, according to some
    scientists.

  *  Their research suggests that what we recognize
    as sleep—closed eyes, physical stillness and
    lack of consciousness—occurs only after a
    number of different parts of the brain cycle
    into a sleep state.

  *  If this partial-sleep hypothesis is correct,
    some parts of the brain may be asleep while we
    actually appear to be awake, and vice versa.

  *  This new view could explain why, in extremely
    rare cases, individuals may commit serious
    crimes, including murder, during sleep.

There was nothing outwardly unusual about the man
who showed up at the Minnesota Regional Sleep
Disorders Center on June 27, 2005. Like thousands
of other clinic patients, Benjamin Adoyo (not his
real name) was a sleepwalker. A 26-year-old college
student, originally from Kenya, Adoyo had been
wandering at night since childhood. Lately, though,
the behavior had been getting worse. Adoyo had
gotten married in February, and his wife would wake
to him shaking her while looming over their bed and
babbling unintelligibly. Scared, she would simply
do her best to rouse Adoyo, who, once awakened,
never remembered a thing. They lived in a
one-bedroom apartment in Plymouth, a suburb of
Minneapolis, and the sleepwalking was straining
their young marriage. The referral form from
Adoyo's primary care doctor noted that the
patient's wife was “sometimes startled by his
behavior, but no injury, per se.”

After evaluating Adoyo, the sleep center's
clinicians directed him to return on August 10 for
an overnight electroencephalography (EEG) study of
the electrical waves generated by his brain during
sleep. In the middle of the night, Adoyo began
thrashing about and yanking at the wires connected
to the electrodes, pulling out tufts of hair as he
ripped them off. But he did not wake up. The next
morning Michel Cramer Bornemann, director of the
center, told Adoyo that the study supported a
diagnosis of a sleep disorder known as a non-REM
parasomnia. Recounting when Adoyo ripped off the
sensors, Bornemann asked, “Do you recall feeling
any pain or pulling?”


This article was originally published with the
title The Case of the Sleeping Slayer.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Will We Continue to Get Smarter? The Flynn Effect Says Yes
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=will-we-keep-getting-smarter-flynn-effect-says-yes
author: Tim Folger
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Kevin Van Aelst


In Brief

  *  IQ scores have been steadily rising for a
    century, a phenomenon now known as the Flynn
    effect.

  *  The surge in scores comes from supposedly
    “culture-free” tests of intelligence such as
    pattern matching.

  *  Researchers believe the effect has its root in
    the increasingly abstracted nature of modern
    life.

  *  More advanced minds create technologies that,
    in turn, enhance intelligence still further,
    forging a feedback loop that shows no signs of
    abating.

Twenty-eight years ago James R. Flynn, a researcher
at the University of Otago in New Zealand,
discovered a phenomenon that social scientists
still struggle to explain: IQ scores have been
increasing steadily since the beginning of the 20th
century. Flynn went on to examine intelligence-test
data from more than two dozen countries and found
that scores were rising by 0.3 point a year—three
full points per decade. Nearly 30 years of
follow-up studies have confirmed the statistical
reality of the global uptick, now known as the
Flynn effect. And scores are still climbing.

“To my amazement, in the 21st century the increases
are continuing,” says Flynn, whose most recent book
on the subject— Are We Getting Smarter?— is being
published this month. “The latest data show the
gains in America humming right along at the old
rate of three tenths of a point a year.”


This article was originally published with the
title Can We Keep Getting Smarter?.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: How Far Can Climate Change Go?
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=how-far-can-climate-change-go
author: Ken Caldeira
article formatted: [IMAGE]

NEAR FUTURE: Industrial civilization continues to
pump out more and more greenhouse gases with each
passing year, which will result in hotter
temperatures, an acidified ocean and weirder
weather by century's end.

Image: Tyler Jacobson


In Brief

The carbon dioxide emitted today will affect the
planet for hundreds of thousands of years.

If humanity continues to spew greenhouse gases into
the air at the current rate, we will re-create the
hot, wet conditions of the Cretaceous era, some 100
million years ago.

At present, humanity is altering the climate 5,000
times faster than the pace of the most rapid
natural warming episode in our planet’s past.

Business, government or technology forecasts
usually look five or 10 years out, 50 years at
most. Among climate scientists, there is some talk
of century's end. In reality, carbon dioxide dumped
into the atmosphere today will affect Earth
hundreds of thousands of years hence.

How will greenhouse gases change the far future? No
one can say for sure exactly how Earth will
respond, but climate scientists—using mathematical
models built from knowledge of past climate
systems, as well as the complex web of processes
that impact climate and the laws of physics and
chemistry—can make predictions about what Earth
will look like.


This article was originally published with the
title The Great Climate Experiment.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Coming Soon: Artificial Limbs Controlled by Thoughts
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=artificial-limbs-controlled-by-thought
author: Miguel A. L. Nicolelis
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Kemp Remillard


In Brief

  *  Brain waves can now control the functioning of
    computer cursors, robotic arms and, soon, an
    entire suit: an exoskeleton that will allow a
    paraplegic to walk and maybe even move
    gracefully.

  *  Sending signals from the brain's outer
    rindlike cortex to initiate movement in the
    exoskeleton represents the state of the art for
    a number of bioelectrical technologies
    perfected in recent years.

  *  The 2014 World Cup in Brazil will serve as a
    proving ground for a brain-controlled
    exoskeleton if, as expected, a handicapped
    teenager delivers the ceremonial opening kick.

In 2014 billions of viewers worldwide may remember
the opening game of the World Cup in Brazil for
more than just the goals scored by the Brazilian
national team and the red cards given to its
adversary. On that day my laboratory at Duke
University, which specializes in developing
technologies that allow electrical signals from the
brain to control robotic limbs, plans to mark a
milestone in overcoming paralysis.

If we succeed in meeting still formidable
challenges, the first ceremonial kick of the World
Cup game may be made by a paralyzed teenager, who,
flanked by the two contending soccer teams, will
saunter onto the pitch clad in a robotic body suit.
This suit—or exoskeleton, as we call it—will
envelop the teenager's legs. His or her first steps
onto the field will be controlled by motor signals
originating in the kicker's brain and transmitted
wirelessly to a computer unit the size of a laptop
in a backpack carried by our patient. This computer
will be responsible for translating electrical
brain signals into digital motor commands so that
the exoskeleton can first stabilize the kicker's
body weight and then induce the robotic legs to
begin the back-and-forth coordinated movements of a
walk over the manicured grass. Then, on approaching
the ball, the kicker will visualize placing a foot
in contact with it. Three hundred milliseconds
later brain signals will instruct the exoskeleton's
robotic foot to hook under the leather sphere,
Brazilian style, and boot it aloft.

This scientific demonstration of a radically new
technology, undertaken with collaborators in Europe
and Brazil, will convey to a global audience of
billions that brain control of machines has moved
from lab demos and futuristic speculation to a new
era in which tools capable of bringing mobility to
patients incapacitated by injury or disease may
become a reality. We are on our way, perhaps by the
next decade, to technology that links the brain
with mechanical, electronic or virtual machines.
This development will restore mobility, not only to
accident and war victims but also to patients with
ALS (also known as Lou Gehrig's disease),
Parkinson's and other disorders that disrupt motor
behaviors that impede arm reaching, hand grasping,
locomotion and speech production. Neuroprosthetic
devices—or brain-machine interfaces—will also allow
scientists to do much more than help the disabled.
They will make it possible to explore the world in
revolutionary ways by providing healthy human
beings with the ability to augment their sensory
and motor skills.

In this futuristic scenario, voluntary electrical
brain waves, the biological alphabet that underlies
human thinking, will maneuver large and small
robots remotely, control airships from afar, and
perhaps even allow the sharing of thoughts and
sensations of one individual with another over what
will become a collective brain-based network.

Thought Machines

The lightweight body suit intended for the kicker,
who has not yet been selected, is still under
development. A prototype, though, is now under
construction at the lab of my great friend and
collaborator Gordon Cheng of the Technical
University of Munich—one of the founding members of
the Walk Again Project, a nonprofit, international
collaboration among the Duke University Center for
Neuroengineering, the Technical University of
Munich, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
in Lausanne, and the Edmond and Lily Safra
International Institute of Neuroscience of Natal in
Brazil. A few new members, including major research
institutes and universities all over the world,
will join this international team in the next few
months.

The project builds on nearly two decades of
pioneering work on brain-machine interfaces at
Duke—research that itself grew out of studies
dating back to the 1960s, when scientists first
attempted to tap into animal brains to see if a
neural signal could be fed into a computer and
thereby prompt a command to initiate motion in a
mechanical device. Back in 1990 and throughout the
first decade of this century, my Duke colleagues
and I pioneered a method through which the brains
of both rats and monkeys could be implanted with
hundreds of hair-thin and pliable sensors, known as
microwires. Over the past two decades we have shown
that, once implanted, the flexible electrical
prongs can detect minute electrical signals, or
action potentials, generated by hundreds of
individual neurons distributed throughout the
animals' frontal and parietal cortices—the regions
that define a vast brain circuit responsible for
the generation of voluntary movements.



This interface has for a full decade used
brain-derived signals to generate movements of
robotic arms, hands and legs in animal experiments.
A critical breakthrough occurred last year when two
monkeys in our lab learned to exert neural control
over the movements of a computer-generated avatar
arm that touched objects in a virtual world but
also provided an “artificial tactile” feedback
signal directly to each monkey's brain. The
software allowed us to train the animals to feel
what it was like to touch an object with virtual
fingers controlled directly by their brain.

The Walk Again consortium—assisted by its
international team of neuroscientists, roboticists,
computer scientists, neurosurgeons and
rehabilitation professionals—has begun to take
advantage of these animal research findings to
create a completely new way to train and
rehabilitate severely paralyzed patients in how to
use brain-machine interface technologies to regain
full-body mobility. Indeed, the first baby steps
for our future ceremonial kicker will happen inside
an advanced virtual-reality chamber known as a Cave
Automatic Virtual Environment, a room with screens
projected on every wall, including the floor and
ceiling. After donning 3-D goggles and a headpiece
that will noninvasively detect brain waves (through
techniques known as electroencephalography—EEG—and
magnetoencephalography), our candidate kicker—by
necessity a lightweight teenager for this first
iteration of the technology—will become immersed in
a virtual environment that stretches out in all
directions. There the youngster will learn to
control the movements of a software body avatar
through thought alone. Little by little, the
motions induced in the avatar will increase in
complexity and will ultimately end with fine-motor
movements such as walking on a changing terrain or
unscrewing a virtual jelly jar top.

Plugging into Neurons

The mechanical movements of an exoskeleton cannot
be manipulated as readily as those of a software
avatar, so the technology and the training will be
more complicated. It will be necessary to implant
electrodes directly in the brain to manipulate the
robotic limbs. We will need not only to place the
electrodes under the skull in the brain but also to
increase the number of neurons to be “read”
simultaneously throughout the cortex. Many of the
sensors will be implanted in the motor cortex, the
region of the frontal lobe most readily associated
with the generation of the motor program that is
normally downloaded to the spinal cord, from which
neurons directly control and coordinate the work of
our muscles. (Some neuroscientists believe that
this interaction between mind and muscle may be
achieved through a noninvasive method of recording
brain activity, like EEG, but that goal has yet to
be practically achieved.)

Gary Lehew in my group at Duke has devised a new
type of sensor: a recording cube that, when
implanted, can pick up signals throughout a
three-dimensional volume of cortex. Unlike earlier
brain sensors, which consist of flat arrays of
microelectrodes whose tips record neuronal
electrical signals, Lehew's cube extends sensing
microwires up, down and sideways throughout the
length of a central shaft.

The current version of our recording cubes contains
up to 1,000 active recording microwires. Because at
least four to six single neurons can be recorded
from each microwire, every cube can potentially
capture the electrical activity of between 4,000 to
6,000 neurons. Assuming that we could implant
several of those cubes in the frontal and parietal
cortices—areas responsible for high-level control
of movement and decision making—we could obtain a
simultaneous sample of tens of thousands of
neurons. According to our theoretical software
modeling, this design would suffice for controlling
the flexibility of movement required to operate an
exoskeleton with two legs and to restore autonomous
locomotion in our patients.



To handle the avalanche of data from these sensors,
we are also moving ahead on making a new generation
of custom-designed neurochips. Implanted in a
patient's skull along with the microelectrodes,
they will extract the raw motor commands needed to
manipulate a whole-body exoskeleton.

Of course, the signals detected from the brain will
then need to be broadcast to the prosthetic limbs.
Recently Tim Hanson, a newly graduated Ph.D.
student at Duke, built a 128-channel wireless
recording system equipped with sensors and chips
that can be encased in the cranium and that is
capable of broadcasting recorded brain waves to a
remote receiver. The first version of these
neurochips is currently being tested successfully
in monkeys. Indeed, we have recently witnessed the
first monkey to operate a brain-machine interface
around the clock using wireless transmission of
brain signals. We filed in July with the Brazilian
government for permission to use this technology in
humans.

For our future soccer ball kicker, the data from
the recording systems will be relayed wirelessly to
a small computer processing unit contained in a
backpack. Multiple digital processors will run
various software algorithms that translate motor
signals into digital commands that are able to
control moving parts, or actuators, distributed
across the joints of the robotic suit, hardware
elements that adjust the positioning of the
exoskeleton's artificial limbs.

Force of Brainpower

The commands will permit the exoskeleton wearer to
take one step and then another, slow down or speed
up, bend over or climb a set of stairs. Some
low-level adjustments to the positioning of the
prosthetic hardware will be handled directly by the
exoskeleton's electromechanical circuits without
any neural input. The space suit–like garment will
remain flexible but still furnish structural
support to its wearer, a surrogate for the human
spinal cord. By taking full advantage of this
interplay between brain-derived control signals and
the electronic reflexes supplied by the actuators,
we hope that our brain-machine interface will
literally carry the World Cup kicker along by force
of willpower.

The kicker will not only move but also feel the
ground underneath. The exoskeleton will replicate a
sense of touch and balance by incorporating
microscopic sensors that both detect the amount of
force from a particular movement and convey the
information from the suit back to the brain. The
kicker should be able to feel that a toe has come
in contact with the ball.

Our decade-long experience with brain-machine
interfaces suggests that as soon as the kicker
starts interacting with this exoskeleton, the brain
will start incorporating this robotic body as a
true extension of his or her own body image. From
training, the accumulated experience obtained from
this continuous feeling of contact with the ground
and the position of the robotic legs should enable
movement with fluid steps over a soccer pitch or
down any sidewalk. All phases of this project
require continuous and rigorous testing in animal
experiments before we begin in humans. In addition,
all procedures must pass muster with regulatory
agencies in Brazil, the U.S. and Europe to ensure
proper scientific and ethical review. Even with all
the uncertainties involved and the short time
required for the completion of its first public
demonstration, the simple idea of reaching for such
a major milestone has galvanized Brazilian
society's interest in science in ways rarely seen
before.

Remote Control

The opening kickoff of the World Cup—or a similar
event, say, the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games
in Rio de Janeiro, if we miss the first deadline
for any reason—will be more than just a one-time
stunt. A hint of what may be possible with this
technology can be gleaned from a two-part
experiment already completed with monkeys. As a
prelude, back in 2007, our research team at Duke
trained rhesus monkeys to walk upright on a
treadmill as the electrical activity of more than
200 cortical neurons was recorded simultaneously.
Meanwhile Gordon Cheng, then at ATR Intelligent
Robotics and Communication Laboratories in Kyoto,
built an extremely fast Internet protocol that
allowed us to send this stream of neuronal data
directly to Kyoto, where it fed the electronic
controllers of CB1, a humanoid robot. In the first
half of this across-the-globe experiment, Cheng and
my group at Duke showed that the same software
algorithms developed previously for translating
thoughts into control of robotic arms could also
convert patterns of neural activity involved in
bipedal locomotion to make two mechanical legs
walk.



The second part of the experiment yielded a much
bigger surprise. As one of our monkeys, Idoya,
walked on the treadmill in Durham, N.C., our
brain-machine interface broadcast a constant stream
of her brain's electrical activity through Cheng's
Internet connection to Kyoto. There CB1 detected
these motor commands and began to walk as well,
almost immediately. CB1 first needed some support
at the waist, but in later experiments it began to
move autonomously in response to the brain-derived
commands generated by the monkey on the other side
of the globe.

What is more, even when the treadmill at Duke
stopped and Idoya ceased walking, she could still
control CB1's leg movements in Kyoto by merely
observing the robot's legs moving on a live video
feed and imagining each step CB1 should take. Idoya
continued to produce the brain patterns required to
make CB1 walk even though her own body was no
longer engaged in this motor task. This
transcontinental brain-machine interface
demonstration revealed that it is possible for a
human or a simian to readily transcend space, force
and time by liberating brain-derived commands from
the physical limits of the biological body that
houses the brain and broadcasting them to a
man-made device located far from the original
thought that generated the action.

These experiments imply that brain-machine
interfaces could make it possible to manipulate
robots sent into environments that a human will
never be able to penetrate directly: our thoughts
might operate a microsurgical tool inside the body,
say, or direct the activities of a humanoid worker
trying to repair a leak at a nuclear plant.

The interface could also control tools that exert
much stronger or lighter forces than our bodies
can, thereby breaking free of ordinary constraints
on the amount of force an individual can exert.
Linking a monkey's brain to a humanoid robot has
already done away with constraints imposed by the
clock: Idoya's mental trip around the globe took 20
milliseconds—less time than was required to move
her own limb.

Along with inspiring visions of the far future, the
work we have done with monkeys gives us confidence
that our plan may be achievable. At the time of
this writing, we are waiting to see whether the
International Football Association (FIFA), which is
in charge of organizing the ceremony, will grant
our proposal to have a paraplegic young adult
participate in the opening ceremony of the
inaugural game of the 2014 World Cup. The Brazilian
government—which is still awaiting FIFA's
endorsement—has tentatively supported our
application.

Bureaucratic difficulties and scientific
uncertainties abound before our vision is realized.
Yet I cannot stop imagining what it will be like
during the brief but historic stroll onto a
tropical green soccer pitch for three billion
people to witness a paralyzed Brazilian youth stand
up, walk again by his or her own volition, and
ultimately kick a ball to score an unforgettable
goal for science, in the very land that mastered
the beautiful game.



ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

Miguel A. L. Nicolelis has pioneered the field of
neuroprosthetics. Heis Duke School of Medicine
Professor of Neurosciences and co-director of the
Duke University Center for Neuroengineering.


MORE TO EXPLORE

Controlling Robots with the Mind. Miguel A. L.
Nicolelis and John K. Chapin in Scientific American,
Vol. 287, No. 4, pages 46–53; October 2002.

Cortical Control of a Prosthetic Arm for Self
Feeding. Meel Velliste et al. in Nature, Vol. 453,
pages 1098–1101; June 19, 2008.

Beyond Boundaries: The New Neuroscience of
Connecting Brains with Machines—and How It Will
Change Our Lives. Miguel Nicolelis. St. Martin's
Griffin, 2012.


title: The Projects that Push the Limits of Engineering
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=projects-that-push-engineering-limits
author: Dave Mosher
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Oliver Munday

Delta Works

The world’s largest water-battling structure isn’t
a dam—it’s a network. More than 10,000 miles of
levees, dikes and dams combine to protect the
Netherlands from the North Sea. The project took
half a century to build, but climate-induced
sea-level rise means that Dutch engineers will
forever be upgrading Delta Works to keep the
country dry.


This article was originally published with the
title The Edge of Ambition.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Breaking Past the Limits of Science
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=beyond-limits
author: The Editors
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Mark Weaver

We humans emerged not long ago from evolution's
forge as a clever animal adept at hunting and
gathering, with intellectual gifts that knew no
bounds. Our journey since has taken us to the
threshold of nature's deepest mysteries. Who are
we, what can we do and where are we headed?

WHO WE ARE

  * What Sleep Crime Tells Us About Consciousness

  * Aspiration Makes Us Human

  * Will We Continue to Get Smarter? The Flynn
    Effect Says Yes

  * Researchers Disagree About How to Extend Human
    Lifespan

WHAT WE CAN DO

  * Coming Soon: Artificial Limbs Controlled by
    Thoughts

  * The Projects that Push the Limits of
    Engineering

  * Searching for Easy Answers to Hard
    Computational Questions

WHERE WE'RE HEADED

  * Experiments Scientists Would Do If They Lived
    Indefinitely

  * How Far Can Climate Change Go?

  * Quantum Uncertainty Poses No Obstacles to
    Nanocomputers



This article was originally published with the
title Beyond Limits.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Researchers Disagree about How to Extend Human Life Span
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=researchers-disagree-about-how-to-extend-human-lifespan
author: Katherine Harmon
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: LEVI BROWN Trunk Archive


In Brief

  *  Researchers are exploring two main approaches
    to extending healthy human life span.

  *  One camp believes we should focus on curing
    disease and replacing damaged body parts via
    stem cell therapies.

  *  Another camp believes we must slow the aging
    process on the cellular and molecular levels.

An American born a century ago would have been
expected to live, on average, just 54 years. Many
children died young, and giving birth was one of
the most dangerous things a woman would do. But
thanks to vaccinations, antibiotics, sanitation and
better maternal care, we are now much more likely
to die in old age than in our youth. An infant born
today should live to see a 78th birthday.

The easy gains against the grim reaper have been
won. Now as people live to ever older ages, they
confront two broad sets of forces that conspire to
impose the ultimate human limit. First, each extra
year we live means another year of accumulated
damage to the body's cells and organs—damage that
slower cellular-repair systems cannot quite fix. In
addition, age is the biggest risk factor for common
deadly ailments that researchers have been
relatively powerless against, such as cancer, heart
disease and Alzheimer's.


This article was originally published with the
title How We All Will Live to Be 100.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Experiments Scientists Would Do if They Lived Indefinitely
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=experiments-scientists-would-do-if-they-lived-indefinitely
author: Davide Castelvecchi
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Pixelgarten


In Brief

  *  Many natural phenomena are difficult to
    observe because they occur on timescales much
    longer than a human life.

  *  The author asked leading researchers what
    experiments could be possible if they could
    live for thousands of years.

  *  Experiments had to be based on current
    technology and had to address a fundamental
    question that cannot be answered in a shorter
    time.

A lifetime is very long relative to the picosecond
it takes for two atoms to form a molecule, but it
is the blink of an eye compared to many natural
phenomena, from the rise of mountain chains to the
collisions of galaxies. To answer questions that
take more than a lifetime to resolve, scientists
hand their efforts down from one generation to the
next. In medical science, for example, longitudinal
studies often follow subjects well after the
original researchers have passed; some studies that
are still ongoing started as far back as the 1920s.
The record for the most extensive sequence of
uninterrupted data gathering in history may belong
to the ancient Babylonians' Astronomical Diaries,
which contain at least six centuries' worth of
observations from the first millennium B.C.; those
records have revealed recurring patterns in such
events as solar and lunar eclipses.

In most fields of scientific research, however,
some of the most interesting and fundamental
questions remain open because scientists simply
have not had enough time to pursue them. But what
if time were no object? I recently spoke with
leading researchers in various fields about the
problems they would attack if they had 1,000
years—or 10,000 or even a million—to make
observations or perform experiments. (To keep the
focus on the science rather than on futurology, I
asked them to assume they could use only technology
that is state of the art today.) Condensed versions
of their intriguing replies follow.

10,000 YEARS: HOW DID LIFE BEGIN?

Robert Hazen, earth scientist at George Mason
University

In the early 1950s Stanley Miller and Harold Urey
of the University of Chicago famously showed that
some basic building blocks of life, such as amino
acids, form spontaneously given the right
conditions. It seemed that solving the mystery of
the origin of life could be just a matter of
combining the right chemicals and waiting long
enough. It has not turned out to be that simple,
but over 10,000 years or so a modern version of the
Urey-Miller experiment might yield some rudimentary
self-replicating molecule able to evolve through
natural selection—in short, life.

An experiment to simulate the origin of life has to
take place in a geochemically plausible environment
and start from scratch. The primordial soup may
have contained millions of different kinds of small
molecules, which could combine and react in an
astronomical number of possible ways. In the ocean,
though, they would have been so diluted that the
chances of any two molecules running into each
other, much less reacting chemically, were very
low. The most plausible explanation is that
self-replicating molecules first assembled on the
surface of rocks. The wet surfaces of primordial
Earth would have constituted a vast natural
laboratory, running perhaps 1030 little experiments
at any one time, over a period of maybe 100 million
to 500 million years.

A 10,000-year laboratory effort could attempt to
re-create this situation by running huge numbers of
tiny experiments simultaneously. These molecular
nurseries would look from the outside like rooms
filled with racks of computer servers, but inside
there would be chemical “labs-on-chips” containing
hundreds of microscopic wells, each with different
combinations of compounds reacting on a variety of
mineral surfaces. The chips would constantly and
autonomously monitor the reactions to check for
signs that a molecule had gone into runaway
self-replication.

Experimenters could cut down the time needed from
millions to thousands of years by focusing on
combinations of chemicals that are most likely do
something interesting. With luck, eventually we
will learn enough about how nature works to trim
this time down to a few decades.

10,000 YEARS: ARE NATURE'S CONSTANTS TRULY FIXED?

Gerald Gabrielse, physicist at Harvard University



The basic laws of physics appear to be universal
and eternal: so far as we know, all protons have
the same amount of electrostatic charge, light
always travels at the same speed, and so on. Yet
certain proposed models of reality allow for
variations, and some astronomical studies have
claimed, controversially, to have seen small
changes. Meanwhile all laboratory data have held
steady. My lab, for instance, has measured the
strength of the electron's magnetism—the most
precise measurement, to my knowledge, of any
property of a fundamental particle. If repeated for
thousands of years, such an experiment might see a
shift.

To measure the electron's magnetism or, more
precisely, its “magnetic moment”—the subatomic
analogue of a bar magnet's strength—we confine a
single electron to a plane with an electrostatic
field and use a magnetic field to force the
electron to move in circles. We keep our apparatus
at less than a tenth of a degree above absolute
zero so that the electron's motion is in its state
of lowest possible energy. With radio-frequency
waves, we then force the electron's magnet to flip.
The particle's response and, in particular, the
rates at which we can make it flip depend on its
magnetic moment, which we can then determine to
three parts in 1013.

If the magnetic moment had changed by one part in
1,000 over the entire history of the universe and
if the change had gone on at a constant pace all
along, our experiment would have already detected
it. Of course, science can never prove that
something is exactly constant, only that its rate
of change is extremely small. Moreover the rate of
change could be much slower now than it was in the
early universe, making it difficult to spot in the
lab. But if we repeated our experiment over 10,000
years and saw no change, that stability would place
stringent constraints on any theoretical
predictions of changing constants. (It would also
cast doubt on assertions that experimental
observations of light from distant quasars have
detected slight changes in the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction since the early moments
of the universe.)

Naturally, our techniques and those of other labs
are certain to improve. I suspect that increasingly
clever methods will enable us to make more progress
in far less time than 10,000 years.

10,000 YEARS: HOW COMMON ARE MEGAQUAKES?

Thorne Lay, seismologist at the University of
California, Santa Cruz

The magnitude 9.0 Tohoku-Oki earthquake and tsunami
that devastated northeastern Japan in March 2011
took the seismology community by surprise: almost
no one thought the responsible fault could release
so much energy in one event. We can reconstruct the
history of seismic activity indirectly by
inspecting the local geology, but this can never
fully substitute for direct detection. Modern
seismographs have been around for only slightly
more than a century, too short a time to give a
clear idea of the largest quakes that might strike
a certain area every few centuries or more. If we
could let these instruments run for thousands of
years, however, we could map seismic risk much more
accurately—including specifying which regions are
capable of magnitude 9.0 even though they have not
seen more than magnitude 8.0 in recorded history.

Multimillennial records would also answer another
riddle: Do megaquakes—by which I mean tremors of
magnitude 8.5 or greater—come in worldwide
clusters? Records of the past 100 years or so
suggest that they might: six of them occurred in
the past decade, for instance, and none in the
three preceding decades. Measurements over a longer
period would tell us if this clustering involves
physical interaction or is just a statistical
fluke.

How smart can they get?

“If I evolved chimps or some other nonhuman primate
toward greater cognitive abilities, how far would
they go?”



Bruce Lahn, geneticist at the University of Chicago

Will we evolve to resist major diseases?

“Humans' diet keeps changing, causing new scourges
such as the diabetes epidemic. Over tens of
thousands of years, will our bodies adapt?”

Sarah Tishkoff, human geneticist at the University
of Pennsylvania

10,000 YEARS: HOW DO MASSIVE STARS BLOW UP?

Cole Miller, astronomer at the University of
Maryland

Supernovae are rare, occurring perhaps once every
several decades in a large spiral galaxy such as
ours. The last time one was seen here was A.D.
1604: Johannes Kepler described it as outshining
everything in the night sky but Venus. All
supernovae recorded in more recent times took place
in other galaxies that are millions, if not
billions, of light-years away. When we finally see
a supernova up close, we will be able to study it
not only with ordinary telescopes but also with two
new kinds of observatories—one detecting neutrinos
and the other, gravitational waves—which will tell
us what actually goes on inside the exploding star.
If you could wait 10,000 years, you would be
virtually guaranteed to get 100 or 200 of these
events—enough to distinguish their subtle
variations.

The explosion of a star could happen in our galaxy
at any time. When it starts, the screens of
computers at a handful of gravitational-wave
observatories around the world will begin to flash,
signaling the passage of ripples in the fabric of
space. These so-called gravitational waves are a
key prediction of Einstein's general theory of
relativity but have so far eluded direct detection.
The waves will signal that the star's core has
begun to collapse under its own gravitational pull.
The compressed matter turns into neutrons and
releases neutrinos—particles that can zip through
matter and thus escape through the star's outer
layers and into space (and reach observatories on
Earth). The energy released by the collapse, mostly
carried by neutrinos, could blow off the outer
layers of the star, making it stupendously bright.
In some cases, however, the shock wave might
fizzle, yielding gravitational waves but no light.
We do not know for sure, because so far we have
only seen the final, visible stage (with the
exception of a handful of neutrinos from a
supernova in 1987). Having thousands of years to
observe would make all the difference. The new
tools could also let us solve another open
question—namely, in what conditions a dying star
leaves behind a black hole or a neutron star.

100,000 YEARS: HOW DO MATERIALS DECAY?

Kristin Persson, theoretical physicist and
materials scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory

We build things all the time, but how do we know
how long they will last? If we are going to build
storage for nuclear waste, we need to be sure that
the containers will last until the material inside
is no longer dangerous. And if we are not going to
fill the planet up with trash, it would help to
know how much time it takes plastics and other
materials to degrade.

The only way to be sure is to put these materials
under stress tests for 100,000 years or so and see
how they hold up. Then we could learn to build
things that truly last—or that degrade in a “green”
way.

We could, for example, test such materials as the
copper-based alloys and glasses typically used for
encasing nuclear waste. (Repositories are supposed
to go deep underground in carefully chosen
locations. But geologic conditions may change in
unpredictable ways within a few thousand years.)
Such experiments would expose the materials to
accelerated wear and tear and to chemical
abuse—say, varying pH. They would dial temperature
up and down to simulate the cycles of day and night
and of the seasons.



Even materials that seem to be impervious to the
harshest conditions over scales of years may
actually be degrading in subtle ways: our
characterization methods are just not good enough
to see whether you have lost a few atoms here and
there. Yet over many thousands of years the damage
could start to show, letting us know which sorts of
materials are best.

Long-term testing would be tremendously helpful for
other technological applications as well. Current
laboratory and simulation techniques, for instance,
cannot predict with confidence how the battery of a
new electric car will perform over the next 15
years. Eventually computer simulations may become
sophisticated enough to substitute for long-term
experiments. In the meantime, though, we need to
exercise extra caution when building things that
need to last.

Will we eventually wage endless local wars?

“If in a few centuries we run out of cheap fossil
fuels and cannot find a replacement, our societies
will return from global to local. Will we relapse
to tribalism and to endless small wars?”

Laurence Smith, geographer at the University of
California, Los Angeles

100,000 YEARS: WHAT MAKES A NEW SPECIES?

Jerry Coyne, evolutionary biologist at the
University of Chicago

Most new species in nature appear when a population
becomes geographically isolated from other
populations. It then adapts to the local
environment and, sooner or later, acquires traits
that prevent it from successfully mating with the
original species or that would make the resulting
offspring sterile, or both. The great open question
of evolutionary biology is, Which of these two
types of reproductive barriers tends to arise
first—those that make crossbreeding difficult or
those that lead to nonviable offspring?

Speciation occurs over geologic timescales. Thus,
although we can see evidence of it in the fossil
record or in DNA, we would have to wait a million
years or more to see it reach completion. (Much
faster routes to speciation have been documented
that do not require geographic separation, but they
are the exception rather than the norm.) But if we
had, say, 100,000 years, we should be able to
reproduce it in the laboratory.

The trick would be to work with an organism that
produces new generations quickly, such as
Drosophila (fruit flies). Researchers would isolate
two or more populations in the lab and expose them
to different diets and other conditions. You would
then need to periodically test each population for
genetic mutations and for changes in its anatomy,
physiology, and behavior and once in a while have
members of different populations meet to see what
happens.

In special cases, my collaborators and I have been
able to understand reproductive barriers indirectly
by looking at many closely related species at
different stages of evolutionary divergence. For
geographically separated species of Drosophila, we
found that the two types of barriers—mating
problems and sterile offspring—evolve at about the
same rate. But for species cohabiting the same
area, interbreeding barriers seem to evolve
quicker. It is not clear, however, whether such
results apply to all groups of organisms.

To obtain a new species much faster—perhaps in as
little as 100 years—you could beef up the selection
pressures to be far stronger than they would
normally be in nature. In a landmark experiment in
the 1980s researchers bred populations of fruit
flies to adapt to different environments—as well as
to prefer mating with individuals that shared their
habitat preferences—in just 25 generations. Yet the
conditions in that experiment were artificial, and
it is doubtful whether the two populations produced
could be regarded as different species. A very long
experiment could be much more definitive.



1 MILLION YEARS: IS THE UNIVERSE LOPSIDED?

Glenn Starkman, physicist at Case Western Reserve
University

The heat of the big bang left behind radiation that
has permeated the universe ever since. Space probes
have mapped this cosmic microwave background, or
CMB, over the entire sky and found it to be
extraordinarily uniform save for small, random
fluctuations, just as big bang theory had
predicted. Such smoothness implies that the early
universe was itself uniform. Yet some analyses,
including those by my collaborators and me, saw an
excess of symmetry between opposite sides of the
sky and other anomalies, including a lack of the
largest fluctuations, those that should span more
than 60 degrees in the firmament.

To find out if these are real features or
statistical flukes, we just need to keep observing.
The CMB picture we see today is an accident of our
place in space and time. The CMB has traveled to us
from all directions for 13.7 billion years.
Surveying it thus means mapping a spherical surface
that surrounds us and has a radius of 13.7 billion
light-years—the distance light has traveled in this
time. If we wait long enough, the sphere will get
bigger and bigger and thus cross new regions of the
early universe. The anomalies are so large that it
may take a billion years for the CMB sphere to get
past them—when the sphere's radius would reach 14.7
billion light-years. If we could wait “just” one
million years, most of the anomalies should be
still there but slightly changed. By then, we would
be able to see if they were on their way to
disappearing—suggesting that they are flukes—or if
their persistence reveals the presence of larger
cosmic structures.

Will our heads get bigger?

“The narrowness of the human birth canal is a major
bottleneck on the size of our heads. Will our use
of C-sections, continued for hundreds of thousands
of years, lead us to evolve larger brains?”

Katerina Harvati, paleoanthropologist at the
University of Tübingen in Germany

How will giving birth at later ages change our
biology?

“People are having children at an older age, when
mutation rates in sperm are higher and the style of
parenting is different. After tens of thousands of
years, could these cultural changes affect our
biology?”

Marcus Feldman, mathematical biologist at Stanford
University

1 MILLION YEARS: ARE PROTONS FOREVER?

Sean M. Carroll, theoretical physicist at the
California Institute of Technology

The universe's ordinary matter consists, for the
most part, of protons—particles that have been
around since the big bang. Whereas other subatomic
particles, including neutrons, can spontaneously
decay, protons appear to be exceptionally stable.
Yet some grand unified theories, or GUTs—attempts
to reinterpret all of particle physics as different
facets of a single force—predict that protons
should break down, too, with average life spans of
up to 1043 years, depending on the theory. If we
wait long enough, though, could we finally see it
happen?

To see the proton decay, all you have to do is fill
a large underground tank with water and monitor it
for little flashes of light that would go off as
the protons in the water's atoms finally died. The
more protons you monitor, the higher the chance
that you will see one decay. Studies done with
existing detectors show that protons last at least
1034 years, values that have already ruled out
numerous GUTs. To have the final word, these
detectors might need to run for 100 million years.
But if we built detectors 100 times larger—making
them about the size of a professional football
stadium, voluminous enough to hold five million
tons of water—just one million years should do.
Unifying particle physics might be worth the wait.



This article was originally published with the
title Questions for the Next Million Years.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

Davide Castelvecchi is a contributing editor for
Scientific American.


MORE TO EXPLORE

Life's Rocky Start. Robert M. Hazen in Scientific
American, Vol. 284, No. 4, pages 76–85; April 2001.

Ripples in Spacetime. W. Wayt Gibbs in Scientific
American, Vol. 286, No. 4, pages 62–71; April 2002.

Inconstant Constants. John D. Barrow and John K.
Webb in Scientific American, Vol. 292, No. 6, pages
56–63; June 2005.

Is the Universe Out of Tune? Glenn D. Starkman and
Dominik J. Schwarz in Scientific American, Vol.
293, No. 2, pages 48–55; August 2005.

What Is a Species? Carl Zimmer in Scientific
American, Vol. 298, No. 6, pages 72–79; June 2008.


title: Aspiration Makes Us Human
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=aspiration-makes-us-human
author: Robert M. Sapolsky
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: Heads of State


In Brief

  *  Many of the challenges we humans face today
    are the result of a mismatch between the
    environment our ancestors adapted to over
    millions of years and the world we now live in.

  *  But this incongruity is itself the result of a
    uniquely human characteristic: our impulse to
    extend ourselves beyond the limits evolution
    set for us.

  *  Science is one of the tools humans use to
    achieve this goal of stretching our physical
    and mental capabilities.

Sit down with an anthropologist to talk about the
nature of humans, and you are likely to hear this
chestnut: “Well, you have to remember that 99
percent of human history was spent on the open
savanna in small hunter-gatherer bands.” It's a
classic cliché of science, and it's true. Indeed,
those millions of ancestral years produced many of
our hallmark traits—upright walking and big brains,
for instance. Of course, those wildly useful
evolutionary innovations came at a price: achy
backs from our bipedal stance; existential despair
from our large, self-contemplative cerebral cortex.
As is so often the case with evolution, there is no
free lunch.

Compounding the challenges of those trade-offs, the
world we have invented—and quite recently in the
grand scheme of things—is dramatically different
from the one to which our bodies and minds are
adapted. Have your dinner come to you (thanks to
the pizza delivery guy) instead of chasing it down
on foot; log in to Facebook to interact with your
nearest and dearest instead of spending the better
part of every day with them for your whole life.
But this is where the utility of the
anthropologist's cliché for explaining the human
condition ends.


This article was originally published with the
title Super Humanity.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Quantum Uncertainty Poses No Obstacles to Knowledge
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=quantum-uncertainty-poses-no-obstacles-nanoparticles
author: David Deutsch
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: GoÃ±i Montes


In Brief

  *  Quantum mechanics used to be described as a
    theory of limits, implying that our
    observations are unavoidably uncertain, that
    randomness rules the world, and that the theory
    itself is too weird to master and forces us to
    abandon the very idea that there is a world out
    there that science could describe.

  *  Those misconceptions are rooted in
    philosophical doctrines, such as logical
    positivism, that were popular during the period
    when physicists developed and honed the theory.

  *  In truth, quantum mechanics imposes no
    significant limits. The quantum world has a
    richness and intricacy that allows new
    practical technologies and kinds of knowledge.

Late in the 19th century an unknown artist depicted
a traveler who reaches the horizon, where the sky
meets the ground. Kneeling in a stylized
terrestrial landscape, he pokes his head through
the firmament to experience the unknown [see
illustration on page 89]. The image, known as the
Flammarion engraving, illustrates the human quest
for knowledge. Two possible interpretations of the
visual metaphor correspond to two sharply different
conceptions of knowledge.

Either it depicts an imaginary barrier that, in
reality, science can always pass through, or it
shows a real barrier that we can penetrate only in
our imagination. By the latter reading, the artist
is saying that we are imprisoned inside a finite
bubble of familiar objects and events. We may
expect to understand the world of direct
experience, but the infinity outside is
inaccessible to exploration and to explanation.
Does science continually transcend the familiar and
reveal new horizons, or does it show us that our
prison is inescapable—teaching us a lesson in
bounded knowledge and unbounded humility?


This article was originally published with the
title Beyond the Quantum Horizon.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


title: Searching for Easy Answers to Hard Computational Questions
article link: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=searching-for-easy-answers-hard-computational-questions
author: John Pavlus
article formatted: [IMAGE]

Image: SET DESIGN: KYLE BEAN; PHOTOGRAPHY: RYAN
HOPKINSON


In Brief

  *  The “P versus NP” question asks whether tough
    problems whose solutions can be quickly checked
    (like a jigsaw puzzle) are, at heart, easily
    solvable as well.

  *  Despite decades of investigation, no one has
    been able to prove that the two categories are
    different. If they were not, machines would
    acquire enormous power.

  *  The problem does not just affect code breakers
    and Web searches. It suggests a fundamental
    limitation for biological evolution, physical
    laws and the nature of knowledge.

On a snowy day in Princeton, N.J., in March 1956, a
short, owlish-looking man named Kurt Gödel wrote
his last letter to a dying friend. Gödel addressed
John von Neumann formally even though the two had
known each other for decades as colleagues at the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. Both men
were mathematical geniuses, instrumental in
establishing the U.S.'s scientific and military
supremacy in the years after World War II. Now,
however, von Neumann had cancer, and there was
little that even a genius like Gödel could do
except express a few overoptimistic pleasantries
and then change the subject:

Dear Mr. von Neumann:


This article was originally published with the
title Machines of the Infinite.



Subscribe Buy This Issue

Already a Digital subscriber? Sign-in Now
If your institution has site license access, enter
here.


total number: 11
